README.md, before:

# GTFS-Realtime Validator [![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/CUTR-at-USF/gtfs-realtime-validator.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/CUTR-at-USF/gtfs-realtime-validator) [![Join the GTFS-realtime chat](https://gtfs.herokuapp.com/badge.svg)](https://gtfs.herokuapp.com/)
Software that validates General Transit Feed Specification (GTFS)-realtime feeds

## Validation Rules

*Please note that this project is still under active development and is in an early alpha state.  It has a limited number of rules and the user interface to view warnings/errors is still under development.*

* [Implemented rules](RULES.md)
* [Planned future rules](https://github.com/CUTR-at-USF/gtfs-realtime-validator/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22new+rule%22)

Have a suggestion for a new rule?  Open an issue with the ["new rule" label](https://github.com/CUTR-at-USF/gtfs-realtime-validator/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22new+rule%22).


## Building and Running the project 

### Prerequisites 

The GTFS-Realtime Validator is implemented as a web application, with the backend code written in Java.  An instance of the [Jetty embedded server](http://www.eclipse.org/jetty/) is used to run the application.

Following are the requirements to get the project up and running: 

* [Java Development Kit (JDK) 1.8 or higher](http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/downloads/index-jsp-138363.html)
* [Apache Maven](https://maven.apache.org/)
* [Java Cryptography Extension (JCE)](http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/downloads/jce8-download-2133166.html) - If you're downloading GTFS or GTFS-rt from secure HTTPS URLs, you may need to install the JCE Extension.  You will need to replace the `US_export_policy.jar` and `local_policy.jar` files in your JVM `/security` directory, such as `C:\Program Files\Java\jdk1.8.0_73\jre\lib\security`, with the JAR files in the JCE Extension download. 

### 1. Build the project 

From the command-line, run:

`mvn package`

This will generate an executable file in the `target/` directory with all the dependencies needed to run the application.
 
Alternately, you can load the project as Maven project in an IDE like [IntelliJ](https://www.jetbrains.com/idea/) or [Netbeans](https://netbeans.org/).  This is the fastest way to build and execute the project if you plan to change the source code.

### 3. Run the application

From the command-line, run: 

`java -jar target/gtfs-rt-validator-1.0.0-SNAPSHOT.jar`

You should see some output, and a message saying `Go to http://localhost:8080 in your browser`. 

### 4. View the application 

Once the application has been started, you can enter URLs for the feeds you'd like to have validated at:
 
 http://localhost:8080

### Configuration
 
**Logging**

If you'd like to change the logging level, for example to see all debug statements, in `src/main/resources/simplelogger.properties` change the following line to say `DEBUG`:
 
 ~~~
 org.slf4j.simpleLogger.defaultLogLevel=DEBUG
 ~~~

`DEBUG` level will show the output for all rule validation in the log.

`WARN` will show a smaller number of informational messages.

 **Port number**
 
 Port `8080` is used by default.  If you'd like to change the port number (e.g., port `80`), you can use the command line parameter `-port 80`:
 
 `java -jar target/gtfs-rt-validator-1.0.0-SNAPSHOT.jar -port 80`
 


## Acknowledgements

This project was funded by the [National Institute for Transportation Communities (NITC)](http://nitc.trec.pdx.edu/) via the project ["Overcoming Barriers for the Wide-scale Adoption of Standardized Real-time Transit Information"](http://nitc.trec.pdx.edu/research/project/1062/Overcoming_Barriers_for_the_Wide-scale_Adoption_of_Standardized_Real-time_Transit_Information).  It also includes work funded under the [2015 Google Summer of Code](https://www.google-melange.com/archive/gsoc/2015/orgs/osgeo/projects/nipuna777.html).

Commit message:

Fix #167 - Add instructions for downloading and running Travis JAR
* Add screenshots
* Add "Quick start" section that downloads and runs the latest Travis-generated JAR that's been automatically uploaded to S3
* Improve instruction formatting

README.md, after:

# GTFS-Realtime Validator [![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/CUTR-at-USF/gtfs-realtime-validator.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/CUTR-at-USF/gtfs-realtime-validator) [![Join the GTFS-realtime chat](https://gtfs.herokuapp.com/badge.svg)](https://gtfs.herokuapp.com/)

A software tool that validates [General Transit Feed Specification (GTFS)-realtime](https://developers.google.com/transit/gtfs-realtime/) feeds


<img src="https://cloud.githubusercontent.com/assets/928045/25874575/2afaa3b0-34e1-11e7-92a4-b0a68f233748.png" width="1000">


## Quick start

*Please note that this project is still under active development and is in an early alpha state.  It has a limited number of rules and the user interface to view warnings/errors is still under development.*

1. Install [Java Development Kit (JDK) 1.8 or higher](http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/downloads/index-jsp-138363.html)
2. Download the latest alpha build:
    * [gtfs-rt-validator-1.0.0-SNAPSHOT.jar](https://s3.amazonaws.com/gtfs-rt-validator/travis_builds/gtfs-rt-validator-1.0.0-SNAPSHOT.jar)
3. From the command line run `java -jar gtfs-rt-validator-1.0.0-SNAPSHOT.jar`
4. When prompted, in your browser go to `http://localhost:8080`
5. Enter your [General Transit Feed Specification (GTFS)-realtime](https://developers.google.com/transit/gtfs-realtime/) and [GTFS](https://developers.google.com/transit/gtfs/) feed URLs and click "Start"

#### Rules

* [Implemented rules](RULES.md)
* [Planned future rules](https://github.com/CUTR-at-USF/gtfs-realtime-validator/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22new+rule%22)

Have a suggestion for a new rule?  Open an issue with the ["new rule" label](https://github.com/CUTR-at-USF/gtfs-realtime-validator/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22new+rule%22).

## Building the project 

#### Prerequisites 

The GTFS-Realtime Validator is implemented as a web application, with the backend code written in Java.  An instance of the [Jetty embedded server](http://www.eclipse.org/jetty/) is used to run the application.

Following are the requirements to get the project up and running: 

* [Java Development Kit (JDK) 1.8 or higher](http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/downloads/index-jsp-138363.html)
* [Apache Maven](https://maven.apache.org/)
* [Java Cryptography Extension (JCE)](http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/downloads/jce8-download-2133166.html) - If you're downloading GTFS or GTFS-rt from secure HTTPS URLs, you may need to install the JCE Extension.  You will need to replace the `US_export_policy.jar` and `local_policy.jar` files in your JVM `/security` directory, such as `C:\Program Files\Java\jdk1.8.0_73\jre\lib\security`, with the JAR files in the JCE Extension download. 

#### 1. Build the project 

From the command-line, run:

`mvn package`

This will generate an executable file in the `target/` directory with all the dependencies needed to run the application.
 
Alternately, you can load the project as Maven project in an IDE like [IntelliJ](https://www.jetbrains.com/idea/) or [Netbeans](https://netbeans.org/).  This is the fastest way to build and execute the project if you plan to change the source code.

#### 2. Run the application

From the command-line, run: 

`java -jar target/gtfs-rt-validator-1.0.0-SNAPSHOT.jar`

You should see some output, and a message saying `Go to http://localhost:8080 in your browser`. 

#### 3. View the application 

Once the application has been started, you can enter URLs for the feeds you'd like to have validated at:
 
 http://localhost:8080

## Configuration
 
**Logging**

If you'd like to change the logging level, for example to see all debug statements, in `src/main/resources/simplelogger.properties` change the following line to say `DEBUG`:
 
 ~~~
 org.slf4j.simpleLogger.defaultLogLevel=DEBUG
 ~~~

`DEBUG` level will show the output for all rule validation in the log.

`WARN` will show a smaller number of informational messages.

 **Port number**
 
 Port `8080` is used by default.  If you'd like to change the port number (e.g., port `80`), you can use the command line parameter `-port 80`:
 
 `java -jar target/gtfs-rt-validator-1.0.0-SNAPSHOT.jar -port 80`
 


## Acknowledgements

This project was funded by the [National Institute for Transportation Communities (NITC)](http://nitc.trec.pdx.edu/) via the project ["Overcoming Barriers for the Wide-scale Adoption of Standardized Real-time Transit Information"](http://nitc.trec.pdx.edu/research/project/1062/Overcoming_Barriers_for_the_Wide-scale_Adoption_of_Standardized_Real-time_Transit_Information).  It also includes work funded under the [2015 Google Summer of Code](https://www.google-melange.com/archive/gsoc/2015/orgs/osgeo/projects/nipuna777.html).
